There was no one. Another wide panoramic window, 
almost as large as the one in the cabin where I had found 
Snow, overhung the ocean, which, sunlit on this side, 
shone with an oleaginous gleam, as though the waves 
secreted a reddish oil. A crimson glow pervaded the 
whole room, whose lay-out suggested a ship's cabin. On 
one side, flanked by book-filled shelves, a retractable bed 
stood against the wall. On the other, between the numerous lockers, hung nickel frames enclosing a series of 
aerial photographs stuck end to end with adhesive tape, 
and racks full of test-tubes and retorts plugged with cotton-wool. Two tiers of white enamel boxes took up the 
space beneath the window. I lifted some of the lids; the 
boxes were crammed with all kinds of instruments, intertwined with plastic tubing. The corners of the room were 
occupied by a refrigerator, a tap and a demisting device. 
For lack of space on the big table by the window, a microscope stood on the floor. Turning round, I saw a tall 
locker beside the entrance door. It was half-open, filled 
with atmosphere suits, laboratory smocks, insulated 
aprons, underclothing, boots for planetary exploration, 
and aluminium cylinders: portable oxygen gear. Two sets 
of this equipment, complete with masks, hung down from 
one of the knobs of the vertical bed. Everywhere there was 
the same chaos, a general disorder which someone had 
made a hasty attempt to disguise. I sniffed the air. I could 
detect a faint smell of chemical reagents and traces of 
something more acrid-- chlorine? Instinctively I searched 
the ceiling for the grills over the air-vents: strips of paper 
attached to the bars were fluttering gently; the air was 
circulating normally. In order to make a relatively free 
space around the bed, between the bookshelves and the 
locker, I cleared two chairs of their litter of books, instruments, and tools, which I piled haphazardly on the other 
side of the room. 

I pulled out a bracket to hang up my spacesuit, took 
hold of the zip-fastener, then let go again. Deterred by the 
confused idea that I was depriving myself of a shield, I 
could not bring myself to remove it. Once more I looked 
round the room. I checked that the door was shut tight 
and that it had no lock, and after a brief hesitation I 
dragged some of the heaviest boxes to the doorway. Having built this temporary barricade, I freed myself from my 
clanking armor in three quick movements. A narrow 
looking-glass, built into the locker door, reflected part of 
the room, and out of the corner of my eye I caught sight 
of something moving. I jumped, but it was only my own 
reflection. Underneath the spacesuit, my overalls were 
drenched with sweat. I took them off and pulled back a 
sliding door, revealing the bright-tiled walls of a small 
bathroom. A long, flat box lay in the hollow at the base of 
the shower; I carried it into the room. As I put it down, 
the springlid flew up and disclosed a number of compartments filled with strange objects: mis-shapen forms in a 
dark metal, grotesque replicas of the instruments in the 
racks. Not one of the tools was usable; they were blunted, 
distorted, melted, as though they had been in a furnace. 
Strangest of all, even the porcelain handles, virtually incombustible, were twisted out of shape. Even at maximum 
temperature, no laboratory furnace could have melted 
them; only, perhaps, an atomic pile. I took a Geiger counter from the pocket on my spacesuit, but when I held it 
over the debris, it remained dumb. 

By now I was wearing nothing but my underwear. I tore 
it off, flung it across the room and dashed under the 
shower. The shock of the water did me good. Turning 
beneath the scalding, needle-sharp jets, I scrubbed myself 
vigorously, splashing the walls, expelling, eradicating 
from my skin the thick scum of morbid apprehensions 
which had pervaded me since my arrival. 

I rummaged in the locker and found a work-suit which 
could also be worn under an atmosphere suit. As I pocketed my few belongings, I felt something hard tucked 
between the pages of my notebook: it was a key, the key 
to my apartment, down there on Earth. Absently, I turned 
it over in my fingers. Finally I put it down on the table. It 
occurred to me suddenly that I might need a weapon. An 
all-purpose pocket-knife was hardly sufficient for my 
needs, but I had nothing else, and I was not going to start 
searching for a gamma pistol or something else of the 
kind. 

I sat down on a tubular stool in the middle of the clear 
space, glad to be alone, and seeing with satisfaction that 
I had over half an hour to myself. (By nature, I have always 
been scrupulous about keeping engagements, whether 
important or trivial.) The hands of the clock, its face divided into twenty-four hours, pointed to seven o'clock. 

The sun was setting. 07.00 hours here was 20.00 hours on 
board the Prometheus. On Moddard's screens, Solaris 
would be nothing but an indistinct dust-cloud, mingled 
with the stars. But what did the Prometheus matter to me 
now? I closed my eyes. I could hear no sound except the 
moaning of the ventilation pipes and a faint trickling of 
water from the bathroom. 

If I had understood correctly, it was only a short time 
since Gibarian had died. What had they done with his 
body? Had they buried it? No, that was impossible on this 
planet. I puzzled over the question for a long time, concentrating on the fate of the corpse; then, realizing the 
absurdity of my thoughts, I began to pace up and down. 
My toe knocked against a canvas bag half-buried under a 
pile of books; I bent down and picked it up. It contained 
a small bottle made of colored glass, so light that it might 
have been blown out of paper. I held it up to the window 
in the purplish glow of the somber twilight, now overhung 
by a sooty fog. What was I doing, allowing myself to be 
distracted by irrelevancies, by the first trifle which came 
to hand? 

I gave a start: the lights had gone on, activated by a 
photo-electric relay; the sun had set. What would happen 
next? I was so tense that the sensation of an empty space 
behind me became unbearable. In an attempt to pull myself together, I took a chair over to the bookshelves and 
chose a book familiar to me: the second volume of the 
early monograph by Hughes and Eugel, Historia Solaris. I 
rested the thick, solidly bound volume on my knees and 
began leafing through the pages. 

The discovery of Solaris dated from about 100 years 
before I was born. 

The planet orbits two suns: a red sun and a blue sun. 
For 45 years after its discovery, no spacecraft had visited 
Solaris. At that time, the Gamow-Shapley theory -- that life 
was impossible on planets which are satellites of two solar 
bodies -- was firmly believed. The orbit is constantly being 
modified by variations in the gravitational pull in the 
course of its revolutions around the two suns. 

Due to these fluctuations in gravity, the orbit is either 
flattened or distended and the elements of life, if they 
appear, are inevitably destroyed, either by intense heat or 
an extreme drop in temperature. These changes take 
place at intervals estimated in millions of years -- very 
short intervals, that is, according to the laws of astronomy 
and biology (evolution takes hundreds of millions of years 
if not a billion). 

According to the earliest calculations, in 500,000 years' 
time Solaris would be drawn one half of an astronomic 
unit nearer to its red sun, and a million years after that 
would be engulfed by the incandescent star. 

A few decades later, however, observations seemed to 
suggest that the planet's orbit was in no way subject to the 
expected variations: it was stable, as stable as the orbit of 
the planets in our own solar system. 

The observations and calculations were reworked with 
great precision; they simply confirmed the original conclusions: Solaris's orbit was unstable. 

A modest item among the hundreds of planets discovered annually -- to which official statistics devoted only a 
few lines defining the characteristics of their orbits -- 
Solaris eventually began to attract special attention and 
attain a high rank. 

Four years after this promotion, overflying the planet 
with the Laakon and two auxiliary craft, the Ottenskjold 
expedition undertook a study of Solaris. This expedition 
being in the nature of a preliminary, not to say improvised 
reconnaissance, the scientists were not equipped for a 
landing. Ottenskjold placed a quantity of automatic observation satellites into equatorial and polar orbit, their 
principal function being to measure the gravitational pull. 
In addition, a study was made of the planet's surface, 
which is covered by an ocean dotted with innumerable 
flat, low-lying islands whose combined area is less than 
that of Europe, although the diameter of Solaris is a fifth 
greater than Earth's. These expanses of barren, rocky 
territory, irregularly distributed, are largely concentrated 
in the southern hemisphere. At the same time the composition of the atmosphere -- devoid of oxygen -- was 
analyzed, and precise measurements made of the planet's 
density, from which its albedo and other astronomical 
characteristics were determined. As was foreseeable, no 
trace of life was discovered, either on the islands or in the 
ocean. 

During the following ten years, Solaris became the center of attraction for all observatories concerned with the 
study of this region of space, for the planet had in the 
meantime shown the astonishing faculty of maintaining 
an orbit which ought, without any shadow of doubt, to 
have been unstable. The problem almost developed into 
a scandal: since the results of the observations could only 
be inaccurate, attempts were made (in the interests of 
science) to denounce and discredit various scientists or 
else the computers they used. 

Lack of funds delayed the departure of a proper Solaris 
expedition for three years. Finally Shannahan assembled 
his team and obtained three C-tonnage vessels from the 
Institute, the largest starships of the period. A year and 
a half before the arrival of the expedition, which left from 
the region of Alpha in Aquarius, a second exploration 
fleet, acting in the name of the Institute, placed an automatic satellite -- Luna 247 -- into orbit around Solaris. 
This satellite, after three successive reconstructions at 
roughly ten-year intervals, is still functioning today. The 
data it supplied confirmed beyond doubt the findings of 
the Ottenskjold expedition concerning the active character of the ocean's movements. 

One of Shannahan's ships remained in orbit, while the 
two others, after some preliminary attempts, landed in the 
southern hemisphere, in a rocky area about 600 miles 
square. The work of the expedition lasted eighteen 
months and was carried out under favorable conditions, 
apart from an unfortunate accident brought about by the 
malfunction of some apparatus. In the meantime, the 
scientists had split into two opposing camps; the bone of 
contention was the ocean. On the basis of the analyses, it 
had been accepted that the ocean was an organic formation (at that time, no one had yet dared to call it living). 
But, while the biologists considered it as a primitive formation -- a sort of gigantic entity, a fluid cell, unique and 
monstrous (which they called 'prebiological'), surrounding the globe with a colloidal envelope several miles thick 
in places -- the astronomers and physicists asserted that it 
must be an organic structure, extraordinarily evolved. According to them, the ocean possibly exceeded terrestrial 
organic structures in complexity, since it was capable of 
exerting an active influence on the planet's orbital path. 
Certainly, no other factor could be found that might explain the behavior of Solaris; moreover, the planeto-physicists had established a relationship between certain 
processes of the plasmic ocean and the local measurements of gravitational pull, which altered according to the 
'matter transformations' of the ocean. 

Consequently it was the physicists, rather than the biologists, who put forward the paradoxical formulation of 
a 'plasmic mechanism,' implying by this a structure, possibly without life as we conceive it,
but capable of performing functional activities -- on an astronomic scale,it 
should be emphasized. 

It was during this quarrel, whose reverberations soon 
reached the ears of the most eminent authorities, that the 
Gamow-Shapley doctrine, unchallenged for eighty years, 
was shaken for the first time. 

There were some who continued to support the Ga- 
mow-Shapley contentions, to the effect that the ocean had 
nothing to do with life, that it was neither 'parabiological' 
nor 'prebiological' but a geological formation -- of extreme rarity, it is true -- with the unique ability to stabilize 
the orbit of Solaris, despite the variations in the forces of 
attraction. Le Chatelier's law was enlisted in support of 
this argument. 

To challenge this conservative attitude, new hypotheses 
were advanced -- of which Civito-Vitta's was one of the 
most elaborate -- proclaiming that the ocean was the 
product of a dialectical development: on the basis of its 
earliest pre-oceanic form, a solution of slow-reacting 
chemical elements, and by the force of circumstances (the 
threat to its existence from the changes of orbit), it had 
reached in a single bound the stage of 'homeostatic 
ocean,' without passing through all the stages of terrestrial evolution, by-passing the unicellular and multicellular phases, the vegetable and the animal, the development 
of a nervous and cerebral system. In other words, unlike 
terrestrial organisms, it had not taken hundreds of millions of years to adapt itself to its environment -- culminating in the first representatives of a species endowed 
with reason -- but dominated its environment immediately. 

This was an original point of view. Nevertheless, the 
means whereby this colloidal envelope was able to stabilize the planet's orbit remained unknown. For almost a 
century, devices had existed capable of creating artificial 
magnetic and gravitational fields; they were called gravitors. But no one could even guess how this formless glue 
could produce an effect which the gravitors achieved by 
the use of complicated nuclear reactions and enormously 
high temperatures. The newspapers of the day, exciting 
the curiosity of the layman and the anger of the scientist, 
were full of the most improbable embroideries on the 
theme of the 'Solaris Mystery,' one reporter going so far 
as to suggest that the ocean was, no less, a distant relation 
to our electric eels! 

Just when a measure of success had been achieved in 
unravelling this problem, it turned out, as often happened 
subsequently in the field of Solarist studies, that the explanation replaced one enigma by another, perhaps even 
more baffling. 

Observations showed, at least, that the ocean did not 
react according to the same principles as our gravitors 
(which, in any case, would have been impossible), but 
succeeded in controlling the orbital periodicity directly. 
One result, among others, was the discovery of discrepancies in the measurement of time along one and the 
same meridian on Solaris. Thus the ocean was not only in 
a sense "aware" of the Einstein-Boevia theory; it was also 
capable of exploiting the implications of the latter (which 
was more than we could say of ourselves). 

With the publication of this hypothesis, the scientific 
world was torn by one of the most violent controversies 
of the century. Revered and universally accepted theories 
foundered; the specialist literature was swamped by out- 
rageous and heretical treatises; 'sentient ocean' or 'gravity-controlling colloid' -- the debate became a burning 
issue. 

All this happened several years before I was born. 
When I was a student -- new data having accumulated in 
the meantime -- it was already generally agreed that there 
was life on Solaris, even if it was limited to a single inhabitant. 

The second volume of Hughes and Eugel, which I was 
still leafing through mechanically, began with a systematization that was as ingenious as it was amusing. The table 
of classification comprised three definitions: Type: Polythera; Class: Syncytialia; Category: Metamorph. 

It might have been thought that we knew of an infinite 
number of examples of the species, whereas in reality 
there was only the one -- weighing, it is true, some seven 
hundred billion tons. 

Multicolored illustrations, picturesque graphs, analytical summaries and spectral diagrams flickered through 
my fingers, explaining the type and rhythm of the fundamental transformations as well as the chemical reactions. 
Rapidly, infallibly, the thick tome led the reader on to the 
solid ground of mathematical certitude. One might have 
assumed that we knew everything there was to be known 
about this representative of the category Metamorph, 
which lay some hundreds of metres below the metal hull 
of the Station, obscured at the moment by the shadows of 
the four-hour night. 

In fact, by no means everybody was yet convinced that 
the ocean was actually a living 'creature,' and still less, it 
goes without saying, a rational one. I put the heavy volume 
back on the shelf and took up the one next to it, which was 
in two parts. The first part was devoted to a resume of the 
countless attempts to establish contact with the ocean. I 
could well remember how, when I was a student, these 
attempts were the subject of endless anecdotes, jokes and 
witticisms. Compared with the proliferation of speculative ideas which were triggered off by this problem, medieval scholasticism seemed a model of scientific 
enlightenment. The second part, nearly 1500 pages long, 
was devoted exclusively to the bibliography of the subject. 
There would not have been enough room for the books 
themselves in the cabin in which I was sitting. 

The first attempts at contact were by means of specially 
designed electronic apparatus. The ocean itself took an 
active part in these operations by remodelling the instruments. All this, however, remained somewhat obscure. 
What exactly did the ocean's 'participation' consist of? It 
modified certain elements in the submerged instruments, 
as a result of which the normal discharge frequency was 
completely disrupted and the recording instruments reg- 
istered a profusion of signals -- fragmentary indications 
of some outlandish activity, which in fact defeated all attempts at analysis. Did these data point to a momentary 
condition of stimulation, or to regular impulses correlated with the gigantic structures which the ocean was 
in the process of creating elsewhere, at the antipodes of 
the region under investigation? Had the electronic apparatus recorded the cryptic manifestation of the ocean's 
ancient secrets? Had it revealed its innermost workings to 
us? Who could tell? No two reactions to the stimuli were 
the same. Sometimes the instruments almost exploded 
under the violence of the impulses, sometimes there was 
total silence; it was impossible to obtain a repetition of 
any previously observed phenomenon. Constantly, it 
seemed, the experts were on the brink of deciphering the 
ever-growing mass of information. Was it not, after all, 
with this object in mind that computers had been built of 
virtually limitless capacity, such as no previous problem 
had ever demanded? 

And, indeed, some results were obtained. The ocean as 
a source of electric and magnetic impulses and of gravitation expressed itself in a more or less mathematical language. Also, by calling on the most abstruse branches of 
statistical analysis, it was possible to classify certain frequencies in the discharges of current. Structural homologues were discovered, not unlike those already 
observed by physicists in that sector of science which 
deals with the reciprocal interaction of energy and matter, elements and compounds, the finite and the infinite. This 
correspondence convinced the scientists that they were 
confronted with a monstrous entity endowed with reason, 
a protoplasmic ocean-brain enveloping the entire planet 
and idling its time away in extravagant theoretical cognitation about the nature of the universe. Our instruments 
had intercepted minute random fragments of a prodigious and everlasting monologue unfolding in the depths 
of this colossal brain, which was inevitably beyond our 
understanding. 

So much for the mathematicians. These hypotheses, 
according to some people, underestimated the resources 
of the human mind; they bowed to the unknown, proclaiming the ancient doctrine, arrogantly resurrected, of 
ignoramus et ignorabimus. Others regarded the mathematicians' hypotheses as sterile and dangerous nonsense, 
contributing towards the creation of a modern mythology 
based on the notion of this giant brain -- whether plasmic 
or electronic was immaterial -- as the ultimate objective of 
existence, the very synthesis of life. 

Yet others. . . but the would-be experts were legion and 
each had his own theory. A comparison of the 'contact' 
school of thought with other branches of Solarist studies, 
in which specialization had rapidly developed, especially 
during the last quarter of a century, made it clear that a 
Solarist-cybernetician had difficulty in making himself understood to a Solarist-symmetriadologist. Veubeke, director of the Institute when I was studying there, had 
asked jokingly one day: "How do you expect to communicate with the ocean, when you can't even understand one 
another?" The jest contained more than a grain of truth. 

The decision to categorize the ocean as a metamorph 
was not an arbitrary one. Its undulating surface was capable of generating extremely diverse formations which 
resembled nothing ever seen on Earth, and the function 
of these sudden eruptions of plasmic 'creativity,' whether 
adaptive, explorative or what, remained an enigma. 




Afterward they enjoyed a great luxury: Rick had room service bring up coffee. He sat for a long
time within the arms of a green, black, and gold leaf lounge chair, sipping coffee and meditating about
the next few hours. Rachael, in the bathroom, squeaked and hummed and splashed in the midst of a
hot shower.
 "You made a good deal when you made that deal," she called when she had shut off the water;
dripping, her hair tied up with a rubber band, she appeared bare and pink at the bathroom door.
"We androids can't control our physical, sensual passions. You probably knew that; in my opinion
you took advantage of me." She did not, however, appear genuinely angry. If anything she had
become cheerful and certainly as human as any girl he had known. "Do we really have to go track
down those three andys tonight?"
 "Yes," he said. Two for me to retire, he thought; one for you. As Rachael put it, the deal had been
made.
 Gathering a giant white bath towel about her, Rachael said, "Did you enjoy that?"
 "Yes."
 "Would you ever go to bed with an android again?"
 "If it was a girl. If she resembled you."
 Rachael said, "Do you know what the lifespan of a humanoid robot such as myself is? I've been in
existence two years. How long do you calculate I have?"
 After a hesitation he said, "About two more years."
 "They never could solve that problem. I mean cell replacement. Perpetual or anyhow semiperpetual renewal.
Well, so it goes." Vigorously she began drying herself. Her face had become
expressionless.
 "I'm sorry," Rick said.
 "Hell," Rachael said, "I'm sorry I mentioned it. Anyhow it keeps humans from running off and living
with an android."
 "And this is true with you Nexus-6 types too?"
 "It's the metabolism. Not the brain unit." She trotted out, swept up her underpants, and began to
dress.
 He, too, dressed. Then together, saying little, the two of them journeyed to the roof field, where
his hovercar had been parked by the pleasant white-clad human attendant.
 As they headed toward the suburbs of San Francisco, Rachael said, "It's a nice night."
 "My goat is probably asleep by now," he said. "Or maybe goats are nocturnal. Some animals
never sleep. Sheep never do, not that I could detect; whenever you look at them they're looking
back. Expecting to be fed."
 "What sort of wife do you have?"
 He did not answer.
 "Do you - "
 "If you weren't an android," Rick interrupted, "if I could legally marry you, I would."
 Rachael said, "Or we could live in sin, except that I'm not alive."
 "Legally you're not. But really you are. Biologically. You're not made out of transistorized circuits
like a false animal; you're an organic entity." And in two years, he thought, you'll wear out and die.
Because we never solved the problem of cell replacement, as you pointed out. So I guess it doesn't
matter anyhow.
89
 This is my end, he said to himself. As a bounty hunter. After the Batys there won't be any more.
Not after this, tonight.
 "You look so sad," Rachael said.
 Putting his hand out he touched her cheek.
 "You're not going to be able to hunt androids any longer," she said calmly. "So don't look sad.
Please."
 He stared at her.
 "No bounty bunter ever has gone on," Rachael said. "After being with me. Except one. A very
cynical man. Phil Resch. And he's nutty; he works out in left field on his own."
 "I see," Rick said. He felt numb. Completely. Throughout his entire body.
 "But this trip we're taking," Rachael said, "won't be wasted, because you're going to meet a
wonderful, spiritual man."
 "Roy Baty," he said. "Do you know all of them?"
 "I knew all of them, when they still existed. I know three, now. We tried to stop you this morning,
before you started out with Dave Holden's list. I tried again, just before Polokov reached you. But
then after that I had to wait."
 "Until I broke down," he said. "And had to call you."
 "Luba Luft and I had been close, very close friends for almost two years. What did you think of
her? Did you like her?
 "I liked her."
 "But you killed her."
 "Phil Resch killed her."
 "Oh, so Phil accompanied you back to the opera house. We didn't know that; our
communications broke down about then. We knew just that she had been killed; we naturally
assumed by you."
 "From Dave's notes," he said, "I think I can still go ahead and retire Roy Baty. But maybe not
Irmgard Baty." And not Pris Stratton, he thought. Even now; even knowing this.
 "So all that took place at the hotel" he said, "consisted of a - "
 "The association," Rachael said, "wanted to reach the bounty hunters here and in the Soviet Union.
This seemed to work . . . for reasons which we do not fully understand. Our limitation again, I
guess."
 "I doubt if it works as often or as well as you say," he said thickly.
 "But it has with you."
 "We'll see."
 "I already know," Rachael said. "When I saw that expression on your face, that grief. I look for
that."
 "How many times have you done this?"
 "I don't remember. Seven, eight. No, I believe it's nine." She - or rather it - nodded. "Yes, nine
times."
 "The idea is old-fashioned," Rick said.
 Startled, Rachael said, "W-what?"
 Pushing the steering wheel away from him he put the car into a gliding decline. "Or anyhow that's
how it strikes me. I'm going to kill you," he said. "And go on to Roy and Irmgard Baty and Pris
Stratton alone."
90
 "That's why you're landing?" Apprehensively, she said, "There's a fine; I'm the property, the legal
property, of the association. I'm not an escaped android who fled here from Mars; I'm not in the
same class as the others."
 "But," he said, "if I can kill you then I can kill them."
 Her hands dived for her bulging, overstuffed, kipple-filled purse; she searched frantically, then
gave up. "Goddamn this purse," she said with ferocity. "I never can lay my hands on anything in it.
Will you kill me in a way that won't hurt? I mean, do it carefully. If I don't fight; okay? I promise not
to fight. Do you agree?"
 Rick said, "I understand now why Phil Resch said what he said. He wasn't being cynical; he had
just learned too much. Going through this - I can't blame him. It warped him."
 "But the wrong way." She seemed more externally composed, now. But still fundamentally frantic
and tense. Yet, the dark fire waned; the life force oozed out of her, as he had so often witnessed
before with other androids. The classic resignation. Mechanical, intellectual acceptance of that which
a genuine organism - with two billion years of the pressure to live and evolve hagriding it - could
never have reconciled itself to.
 "I can't stand the way you androids give up," he said savagely. The car now swooped almost to
the ground; he had to jerk the wheel toward him to avoid a crash. Braking, he managed to bring the
car to a staggering, careening halt; he slammed off the motor and got out his laser tube.
 "At the occipital bone, the posterior base of my skull," Rachael said. "Please." She twisted about
so that she did not have to look at the laser tube; the beam would enter unperceived.
 Putting his laser tube away Rick said, "I can't do what Phil Resch said." He snapped the motor
back on, and a moment later they had taken off again.
 "If you're ever going to do it," Rachael said, "do it now. Don't make me wait."
 "I'm not going to kill you." He steered the car in the direction of downtown San Francisco once
again. "Your car's at the St. Francis, isn't it? I'll let you off there and you can head for Seattle." That
ended what he had to say; he drove in silence.
 "Thanks for not killing me," Rachael said presently.
 "Hell, as you said you've only got two years of life left, anyhow. And I've got fifty. I'll live twentyfive times as long as you."
 "But you really look down on me," Rachael said. "For what I did." Assurance had returned to her;
the litany of her voice picked up pace. "You've gone the way of the others.
 The bounty hunters before you. Each time they get furious and talk wildly about killing me, but
when the time comes they can't do it. Just like you, just now." She lit a cigarette, inhaled with relish.
"You realize what this means, don't you? It means I was right; you won't be able to retire any more
androids; it won't be just me, it'll be the Batys and Stratton, too. So go on home to your goat. And
get some rest." Suddenly she brushed at her coat, violently. "Yife! I got a burning ash from my
cigarette - there, it's gone." She sank back against the seat, relaxing.
 He said nothing.
 "That goat," Rachel said. "You love the goat more than you love your wife, probably. First the
goat, then your wife, then last of all - " She laughed merrily. "What can you do but laugh?"
 He did not answer. They continued in silence for a while and then Rachael poked about, found the
car's radio, and switched it on.
 "Turn it off," Rick said.
 "Turn off Buster Friendly and his Friendly Friends? Tum off Amanda Werner and Oscar Scruggs?
It's time to hear Buster's big sensational exposé, which is finally almost arrived." She stooped to read
91
the dial of her watch by the radio's light. "Very soon now. Did you already know about it? He's been
talking about it, building up to it, for - "
 The radio said, " - ah jes wan ta tell ya, folks, that ahm sitten hih with my pal Bustuh, an we're
tawkin en haven a real mighty fine time, waitin expectantly as we ah with each tick uh the clock foh
what ah understan is the mos important announcement of - "
 Rick shut the radio off. "Oscar Scruggs," he said. "The voice of intelligent man."
 Instantly reaching, Rachael clicked the radio back on. "I want to listen. I intend to listen. This is
important, what Buster Friendly has to say on his show tonight."
 The idiotic voice babbled once more from the speaker, and Rachael Rosen settled back and
made herself comfortable. Beside him in the darkness the coal of her cigarette glowed like the rump
of a complacent lightning bug: a steady, unwavering index of Rachael Rosen's achievement. Her
victory over him.



Thufir Hawat slipped into the training room of Castle Caladan, closed the
door softly. He stood there a moment, feeling old and tired and storm-leathered.
His left leg ached where it had been slashed once in the service of the Old
Duke.
 Three generations of them now, he thought.
 He stared across the big room bright with the light of noon pouring through
the skylights, saw the boy seated with back to the door, intent on papers and
charts spread across an ell table.
 How many times must I tell that lad never to settle himself with his back to
a door? Hawat cleared his throat.
 Paul remained bent over his studies.
 A cloud shadow passed over the skylights. Again, Hawat cleared his throat.
 Paul straightened, spoke without turning: "I know. I'm sitting with my back
to a door."
 Hawat suppressed a smile, strode across the room.
 Paul looked up at the grizzled old man who stopped at a corner of the table.
Hawat's eyes were two pools of alertness in a dark and deeply seamed face.
 "I heard you coming down the hall," Paul said. "And I heard you open the
door."
 "The sounds I make could be imitated."
 "I'd know the difference."
 He might at that, Hawat thought. That witch-mother of his is giving him the
deep training, certainly. I wonder what her precious school thinks of that?
Maybe that's why they sent the old Proctor here -- to whip our dear Lady Jessica
into line.
 Hawat pulled up a chair across from Paul, sat down facing the door. He did
it pointedly, leaned back and studied the room. It struck him as an odd place
suddenly, a stranger-place with most of its hardware already gone off to
Arrakis. A training table remained, and a fencing mirror with its crystal prisms
quiescent, the target dummy beside it patched and padded, looking like an
ancient foot soldier maimed and battered in the wars.
 There stand I, Hawat thought.
 "Thufir, what're you thinking?" Paul asked.
 Hawat looked at the boy. "I was thinking we'll all be out of here soon and
likely never see the place again."
 "Does that make you sad?"
 "Sad? Nonsense! Parting with friends is a sadness. A place is only a place."
He glanced at the charts on the table. "And Arrakis is just another place."
 "Did my father send you up to test me?"
 Hawat scowled -- the boy had such observing ways about him. He nodded.
"You're thinking it'd have been nicer if he'd come up himself, but you must know
how busy he is. He'll be along later."
 "I've been studying about the storms on Arrakis."
 "The storms. I see."
 "They sound pretty bad."
 "That's too cautious a word: bad. Those storms build up across six or seven
thousand kilometers of flatlands, feed on anything that can give them a push --
coriolis force, other storms, anything that has an ounce of energy in it. They
can blow up to seven hundred kilometers an hour, loaded with everything loose
that's in their way -- sand, dust, everything. They can eat flesh off bones and
etch the bones to slivers."
 "Why don't they have weather control?"
 "Arrakis has special problems, costs are higher, and there'd be maintenance
and the like. The Guild wants a dreadful high price for satellite control and
your father's House isn't one of the big rich ones, lad. You know that."
 "Have you ever seen the Fremen?"
 The lad's mind is darting all over today, Hawat thought.
 "Like as not I have seen them," he said. "There's little to tell them from
the folk of the graben and sink. They all wear those great flowing robes. And
they stink to heaven in any closed space. It's from those suits they wear --
call them 'stillsuits' -- that reclaim the body's own water."
 Paul swallowed, suddenly aware of the moisture in his mouth, remembering a
dream of thirst. That people could want so for water they had to recycle their
body moisture struck him with a feeling of desolation. "Water's precious there,"
he said.
 Hawat nodded, thinking: Perhaps I'm doing it, getting across to him the
importance of this planet as an enemy. It's madness to go in there without that
caution in our minds.
 Paul looked up at the skylight, aware that it had begun to rain. He saw the
spreading wetness on the gray meta-glass. "Water," he said.
 "You'll learn a great concern for water," Hawat said. "As the Duke's son
you'll never want for it, but you'll see the pressures of thirst all around
you."
 Paul wet his lips with his tongue, thinking back to the day a week ago and
the ordeal with the Reverend Mother. She, too, had said something about water
starvation.
 "You'll learn about the funeral plains," she'd said, "about the wilderness
that is empty, the wasteland where nothing lives except the spice and the
sandworms. You'll stain your eyepits to reduce the sun glare. Shelter will mean
a hollow out of the wind and hidden from view. You'll ride upon your own two
feet without 'thopter or groundcar or mount."
 And Paul had been caught more by her tone -- singsong and wavering -- than
by her words.
 "When you live upon Arrakis," she had said, "khala, the land is empty. The
moons will be your friends, the sun your enemy."
 Paul had sensed his mother come up beside him away from her post guarding
the door. She had looked at the Reverend Mother and asked: "Do you see no hope.
Your Reverence?"
 "Not for the father." And the old woman had waved Jessica to silence, looked
down at Paul. "Grave this on your memory, lad: A world is supported by four
things . . . " She held up four big-knuckled fingers. ". . . the learning of the
wise, the justice of the great, the prayers of the righteous and the valor of
the brave. But all of these are as nothing . . . " She closed her fingers into a
fist. ". . . without a ruler who knows the art of ruling. Make that the science
of your tradition!"
 A week had passed since that day with the Reverend Mother. Her words were
only now beginning to come into full register. Now, sitting in the training room
with Thufir Hawat, Paul felt a sharp pang of fear. He looked across at the
Mentat's puzzled frown.
 "Where were you woolgathering that time?" Hawat asked.
 "Did you meet the Reverend Mother?"
 "That Truthsayer witch from the Imperium?" Hawat's eyes quickened with
interest. "I met her."
 "She . . . " Paul hesitated, found that he couldn't tell Hawat about the
ordeal. The inhibitions went deep.
 "Yes? What did she?"
 Paul took two deep breaths. "She said a thing." He closed his eyes, calling
up the words, and when he spoke his voice unconsciously took on some of the old
woman's tone: " 'You, Paul Atreides, descendant of kings, son of a Duke, you
must learn to rule. It's something none of your ancestors learned.' " Paul
opened his eyes, said: "That made me angry and I said my father rules an entire
planet. And she said, 'He's losing it.' And I said my father was getting a
richer planet. And she said. 'He'll lose that one, too.' And I wanted to run and
warn my father, but she said he'd already been warned -- by you, by Mother, by
many people."
 "True enough," Hawat muttered.
 "Then why're we going?" Paul demanded.
 "Because the Emperor ordered it. And because there's hope in spite of what
that witch-spy said. What else spouted from this ancient fountain of wisdom?"
 Paul looked down at his right hand clenched into a fist beneath the table.
Slowly, he willed the muscles to relax. She put some kind of hold on me, he
thought. How?
 "She asked me to tell her what it is to rule," Paul said. "And I said that
one commands. And she said I had some unlearning to do."
 She hit a mark there right enough, Hawat thought. He nodded for Paul to
continue.
 "She said a ruler must learn to persuade and not to compel. She said he must
lay the best coffee hearth to attract the finest men."
 "How'd she figure your father attracted men like Duncan and Gurney?" Hawat
asked.
 Paul shrugged. "Then she said a good ruler has to learn his world's
language, that it's different for every world. And I thought she meant they
didn't speak Galach on Arrakis, but she said that wasn't it at all. She said she
meant the language of the rocks and growing things, the language you don't hear
just with your ears. And I said that's what Dr. Yueh calls the Mystery of Life."
 Hawat chuckled. "How'd that sit with her?"
 "I think she got mad. She said the mystery of life isn't a problem to solve,
but a reality to experience. So I quoted the First Law of Mentat at her: 'A
process cannot be understood by stopping it. Understanding must move with the
flow of the process, must join it and flow with it.' That seemed to satisfy
her."
 He seems to be getting over it, Hawat thought, but that old witch frightened
him. Why did she do it?
 "Thufir," Paul said, "will Arrakis be as bad as she said?"
 "Nothing could be that bad," Hawat said and forced a smile. "Take those
Fremen, for example, the renegade people of the desert. By first-approximation
analysis, I can tell you there're many, many more of them than the Imperium
suspects. People live there, lad: a great many people, and . . ." Hawat put a
sinewy finger beside his eye. ". . . they hate Harkonnens with a bloody passion.
You must not breathe a word of this, lad. I tell you only as your father's
helper."
 "My father has told me of Salusa Secundus," Paul said. "Do you know, Thufir,
it sounds much like Arrakis . . . perhaps not quite as bad, but much like it."
 "We do not really know of Salusa Secundus today," Hawat said. "Only what it
was like long ago . . . mostly. But what is known -- you're right on that
score."
 "Will the Fremen help us?"
 "It's a possibility." Hawat stood up. "I leave today for Arrakis. Meanwhile,
you take care of yourself for an old man who's fond of you, heh? Come around
here like the good lad and sit facing the door. It's not that I think there's
any danger in the castle; it's just a habit I want you to form."
 Paul got to his feet, moved around the table. "You're going today?"
 "Today it is, and you'll be following tomorrow. Next time we meet it'll be
on the soil of your new world." He gripped Paul's right arm at the bicep. "Keep
your knife arm free, heh? And your shield at full charge." He released the arm,
patted Paul's shoulder, whirled and strode quickly to the door.
 "Thufir! "Paul called.
 Hawat turned, standing in the open doorway.
 "Don't sit with your back to any doors," Paul said.
 A grin spread across the seamed old face. "That I won't, lad. Depend on it."
And he was gone, shutting the door softly behind.
 Paul sat down where Hawat had been, straightened the papers. One more day
here, he thought. He looked around the room. We 're leaving. The idea of
departure was suddenly more real to him than it had ever been before. He
recalled another thing the old woman had said about a world being the sum of
many things -- the people, the dirt, the growing things, the moons, the tides,
the suns -- the unknown sum called nature, a vague summation without any sense
of the now. And he wondered: What is the now?
 The door across from Paul banged open and an ugly lump of a man lurched
through it preceded by a handful of weapons.
 "Well, Gurney Halleck," Paul called, "are you the new weapons master?"
 Halleck kicked the door shut with one heel. "You'd rather I came to play
games, I know," he said. He glanced abound the room, noting that Hawat's men
already had been over it, checking, making it safe for a duke's heir. The subtle
code signs were all around.
 Paul watched the rolling, ugly man set himself back in motion, veer toward
the training table with the load of weapons, saw the nine-string baliset slung
over Gurney's shoulder with the multipick woven through the strings near the
head of the fingerboard.
 Halleck dropped the weapons on the exercise table, lined them up -- the
rapiers, the bodkins, the kindjals, the slow-pellet stunners, the shield belts.
The inkvine scar along his jawline writhed as he turned, casting a smile across
the room.
 "So you don't even have a good morning for me, you young imp," Halleck said.
"And what barb did you sink in old Hawat? He passed me in the hall like a man
running to his enemy's funeral."
 Paul grinned. Of all his father's men, he liked Gurney Halleck best, knew
the man's moods and deviltry, his humors, and thought of him more as a friend
than as a hired sword.
 Halleck swung the baliset off his shoulder, began tuning it. "If y' won't
talk, y' won't," he said.
 Paul stood, advanced across the room, calling out: "Well, Gurney, do we come
prepared for music when it's fighting time?"
 "So it's sass for our elders today," Halleck said. He tried a chord on the
instrument, nodded.
 "Where's Duncan Idaho?" Paul asked. "Isn't he supposed to be teaching me
weaponry?"
 "Duncan's gone to lead the second wave onto Arrakis," Halleck said. "All you
have left is poor Gurney who's fresh out of fight and spoiling for music." He
struck another chord, listened to it, smiled. "And it was decided in council
that you being such a poor fighter we'd best teach you the music trade so's you
won't waste your life entire."
 "Maybe you'd better sing me a lay then," Paul said. "I want to be sure how
not to do it."
 "Ah-h-h, hah!" Gurney laughed, and he swung into "Galacian Girls." his
multipick a blur over the strings as he sang:
"Oh-h-h, the Galacian girls
Will do it for pearls,
And the Arrakeen for water!
But if you desire dames
Like consuming flames,
Try a Caladanin daughter!"
 "Not bad for such a poor hand with the pick," Paul said, "but if my mother
heard you singing a bawdy like that in the castle, she'd have your ears on the
outer wall for decoration."
 Gurney pulled at his left ear. "Poor decoration, too, they having been
bruised so much listening at keyholes while a young lad I know practiced some
strange ditties on his baliset."
 "So you've forgotten what it's like to find sand in your bed," Paul said. He
pulled a shield belt from the table, buckled it fast around his waist. "Then,
let's fight!"
 Halleck's eyes went wide in mock surprise. "So! It was your wicked hand did
that deed! Guard yourself today, young master -- guard yourself." He grabbed up
a rapier, laced the air with it. "I'm a hellfiend out for revenge!"
 Paul lifted the companion rapier, bent it in his hands, stood in the aguile,
one foot forward. He let his manner go solemn in a comic imitation of Dr. Yueh.
 "What a dolt my father sends me for weaponry," Paul intoned. "This doltish
Gurney Halleck has forgotten the first lesson for a fighting man armed and
shielded." Paul snapped the force button at his waist, felt the crinkled-skin
tingling of the defensive field at his forehead and down his back, heard
external sounds take on characteristic shield-filtered flatness. "In shield
fighting, one moves fast on defense, slow on attack," Paul said. "Attack has the
sole purpose of tricking the opponent into a misstep, setting him up for the
attack sinister. The shield turns the fast blow, admits the slow kindjal!" Paul
snapped up the rapier, feinted fast and whipped it back for a slow thrust timed
to enter a shield's mindless defenses.
 Halleck watched the action, turned at the last minute to let the blunted
blade pass his chest. "Speed, excellent," he said. "But you were wide open for
an underhanded counter with a slip-tip."
 Paul stepped back, chagrined.
 "I should whap your backside for such carelessness," Halleck said. He lifted
a naked kindjal from the table and held it up. "This in the hand of an enemy can
let out your life's blood! You're an apt pupil, none better, but I've warned you
that not even in play do you let a man inside your guard with death in his
hand."
 "I guess I'm not in the mood for it today," Paul said.
 "Mood?" Halleck's voice betrayed his outrage even through the shield's
filtering. "What has mood to do with it? You fight when the necessity arises --
no matter the mood! Mood's a thing for cattle or making love or playing the
baliset. It's not for fighting."
 "I'm sorry, Gurney."
 "You're not sorry enough!"
 Halleck activated his own shield, crouched with kindjal outthrust in left
hand, the rapier poised high in his right. "Now I say guard yourself for true!"
He leaped high to one side, then forward, pressing a furious attack.
 Paul fell back, parrying. He felt the field crackling as shield edges
touched and repelled each other, sensed the electric tingling of the contact
along his skin. What's gotten into Gurney? he asked himself. He's not faking
this! Paul moved his left hand, dropped his bodkin into his palm from its wrist
sheath.
 "You see a need for an extra blade, eh?" Halleck grunted.
 Is this betrayal? Paul wondered. Surely not Gurney!
 Around the room they fought -- thrust and parry, feint and counterfeint. The
air within their shield bubbles grew stale from the demands on it that the slow
interchange along barrier edges could not replenish. With each new shield
contact, the smell of ozone grew stronger.
 Paul continued to back, but now he directed his retreat toward the exercise
table. If I can turn him beside the table, I'll show him a trick, Paul thought.
One more step, Gurney.
 Halleck took the step.
 Paul directed a parry downward, turned, saw Halleck's rapier catch against
the table's edge. Paul flung himself aside, thrust high with rapier and came in
across Halleck's neckline with the bodkin. He stopped the blade an inch from the
jugular.
 "Is this what you seek?" Paul whispered.
 "Look down, lad," Gurney panted.
 Paul obeyed, saw Halleck's kindjal thrust under the table's edge, the tip
almost touching Paul's groin.
 "We'd have joined each other in death," Halleck said. "But I'll admit you
fought some better when pressed to it. You seemed to get the mood." And he
grinned wolfishly, the inkvine scar rippling along his jaw.
 "The way you came at me," Paul said. "Would you really have drawn my blood?"
 Halleck withdrew the kindjal, straightened. "If you'd fought one whit
beneath your abilities. I'd have scratched you a good one, a scar you'd
remember. I'll not have my favorite pupil fall to the first Harkonnen tramp who
happens along."
 Paul deactivated his shield, leaned on the table to catch his breath. "I
deserved that, Gurney. But it would've angered my father if you'd hurt me. I'll
not have you punished for my failing."
 "As to that," Halleck said, "it was my failing, too. And you needn't worry
about a training scar or two. You're lucky you have so few. As to your father --
the Duke'd punish me only if I failed to make a first-class fighting man out of
you. And I'd have been failing there if I hadn't explained the fallacy in this
mood thing you've suddenly developed."
 Paul straightened, slipped his bodkin back into its wrist sheath.
 "It's not exactly play we do here," Halleck said.
 Paul nodded. He felt a sense of wonder at the uncharacteristic seriousness
in Halleck's manner, the sobering intensity. He looked at the beet-colored
inkvine scar on the man's jaw, remembering the story of how it had been put
there by Beast Rabban in a Harkonnen slave pit on Giedi Prime. And Paul felt a
sudden shame that he had doubted Halleck even for an instant. It occurred to
Paul, then, that the making of Halleck's scar had been accompanied by pain -- a
pain as intense, perhaps, as that inflicted by a Reverend Mother. He thrust this
thought aside; it chilled their world.
 "I guess I did hope for some play today," Paul said. "Things are so serious
around here lately."
 Halleck turned away to hide his emotions. Something burned in his eyes.
There was pain in him -- like a blister, all that was left of some lost
yesterday that Time had pruned off him.
 How soon this child must assume his manhood, Halleck thought. How soon he
must read that form within his mind, that contract of brutal caution, to enter
the necessary fact on the necessary line: "Please list your next of kin."
 Halleck spoke without turning: "I sensed the play in you, lad, and I'd like
nothing better than to join in it. But this no longer can be play. Tomorrow we
go to Arrakis. Arrakis is real. The Harkonnens are real."
 Paul touched his forehead with his rapier blade held vertical.
 Halleck turned, saw the salute and acknowledged it with a nod. He gestured
to the practice dummy. "Now, we'll work on your timing. Let me see you catch
that thing sinister. I'll control it from over here where I can have a full view
of the action. And I warn you I'll be trying new counters today. There's a
warning you'd not get from a real enemy."
 Paul stretched up on his toes to relieve his muscles. He felt solemn with
the sudden realization that his life had become filled with swift changes. He
crossed to the dummy, slapped the switch on its chest with his rapier tip and
felt the defensive field forcing his blade away.
 "En garde!" Halleck called, and the dummy pressed the attack.
 Paul activated his shield, parried and countered.
 Halleck watched as he manipulated the controls. His mind seemed to be in two
parts: one alert to the needs of the training fight, and the other wandering in
fly-buzz.
 I'm the well-trained fruit tree, he thought. Full of well-trained feelings
and abilities and all of them grafted onto me -- all bearing for someone else to
pick.
 For some reason, he recalled his younger sister, her elfin face so clear in
his mind. But she was dead now -- in a pleasure house for Harkonnen troops. She
had loved pansies . . . or was it daisies? He couldn't remember. It bothered him
that he couldn't remember.
 Paul countered a slow swing of the dummy, brought up his left hand
entretisser.
 That clever little devil! Halleck thought, intent now on Paul's interweaving
hand motions. He's been practicing and studying on his own. That's not Duncan's
style, and it's certainly nothing I've taught him.
 This thought only added to Halleck's sadness. I'm infected by mood, he
thought. And he began to wonder about Paul, if the boy ever listened fearfully
to his pillow throbbing in the night.
 "If wishes were fishes we'd all cast nets," he murmured.
 It was his mother's expression and he always used it when he felt the
blackness of tomorrow on him. Then he thought what an odd expression that was to
be taking to a planet that had never known seas or fishes.